# Alternative Dating of VAT 45956

The Watchtower 2011 claims that VAT 4956 can actually be dated to 588 BC [@watch2011when2, 26]:

> Clearly, much of the astronomical data in VAT 4956 fits the year 588 B.C.E. as the 37th year of Nebuchadnezzar II.
> This, therefore, supports the date of 607 B.C.E. for Jerusalem’s destruction​—just as the Bible indicates.

## Exclusion of the Planetary Observations

The Watchtower has chosen to exclude the planetary observations from their analysis [@watch2011when2, 28]:

> 18\. According to Berichte über die Verhandlungen der Königl. Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig
> (Reports Regarding the Discussions of the Royal Saxonian Society of Sciences at Leipzig); Volume 67; May 1, 1915; in
> the article “Ein astronomischer Beobachtungstext aus dem 37. Jahre Nebukadnezars II” (An Astronomical Observer’s Text
> of the 37th Year Nebuchadnezzar II), by Paul V. Neugebauer and Ernst F. Weidner, pages 67-76, there are 13 sets of
> observations of the moon wherein it is described in relationship with a certain star or constellation. They also list
> 15 sets of planetary observations. (Pages 72-76) Though the cuneiform sign for the moon is clear and unambiguous, some
> of the signs for the names of the planets and their positions are unclear. (Mesopotamian Planetary
> Astronomy​—Astrology, by David Brown, published 2000, pages 53-57) Because of this, the planetary observations are
> open to speculation and to several different interpretations. Since the moon can easily be tracked, the positions of
> those other celestial bodies mentioned on VAT 4956 and connected to the moon can be identified and their positions
> dated with a good measure of certainty. <br>...<br> Because the cuneiform signs for many of the planetary positions
> are open to speculation and to several interpretations, these positions were not used in this survey to pinpoint the
> year intended by this astronomical diary.

But the reference to Brown is taken out of context, he actually arranges the planet names into groups
[@brown2000mesopotamian, 54]:

> I have found that all the names attested for the seven planets in the period c. 750-612 BC can be placed into five
> categories. For example, the names Sagmegar, Delebat, Ṣalbatānu, Šiḫṭu, Kaiamānu, Šamšu and Sîn are unique to Jupiter,
> Venus, Mars, Mercury, Saturn, the Sun and the Moon respectively. They are never used for any other celestial bodies.
> They are what I am terming the "A-names" for these planets.

Within the text of VAT 4956 all the planetary observations refer to the planets by their unambiguous 'A-names'
[@ossendrijver2016translating, 144], so the exclusion is completely unjustified.

## Exclusion of the Lunar Six Observations

The Watchtower has also chosen to exclude the lunar six observations [@watch2011when2, 28]:

> 18a. These time intervals (“lunar threes”) are the measurement of time from, for example, sunset to moonset on the
> first day of the month and during two other periods later in the month. Scholars have tied these time measurements to
> calendar dates. (“The Earliest Datable Observation of the Aurora Borealis,” by F. R. Stephenson and David M. Willis,
> in Under One Sky​—Astronomy and Mathematics in the Ancient Near East, edited by John M. Steele and Annette Imhausen,
> published 2002, pages 420-428) For ancient observers to measure this period required some sort of clock. Such
> measurements were not reliable. (Archimedes, Volume 4, New Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science and
> Technology, “Observations and Predictions of Eclipse Times by Early Astronomers,” by John M. Steele, published 2000,
> pages 65-66) On the other hand, calculating the position of the moon in relation to other celestial bodies was done
> with greater certainty.

The reference to Steele is also out of context, he does not imply that the measurements are entirely unreliable rather
he explains the typical range of accuracy for eclipse time measurements [@steele2000observations, 66]:

> To summarize, it appears that the Babylonian astronomers used the same clepsydras to measure the time of first contact
> relative to sunrise or sunset as they did for the durations of the various phases of the eclipses, and that the same
> clocks were used for their observations of both lunar and solar eclipses. There was no noticeable improvement in the
> accuracy of these clocks over the whole of the Late Babylonian period, despite an improvement in the precision with
> which the Babylonians quoted their times in the middle of the sixth century Be. These clocks were subject to random
> errors in drift arising from the fact that they could only be rated to an accuracy of about 8½%, and could only be
> read with an accuracy of about 3° (12 minutes). Thus a typical Babylonian eclipse timing of about 40° (2 hours 40
> minutes) has an accuracy of just under 7° (24 minutes).

Steele clearly does not consider the eclipse timings useless, for example he uses them as one factor in dating a text
[@steele2000observations, 39]:

> On 19 May 557 BC Mercury would have set during the eclipse and so would probably not have been visible. Also the
> timings given in the report are very different to those given by modern computations. On 30 April 59 AD Mercury, Venus
> and Sirius would have been above the horizon but Mercury would be too faint (mag. = +0.5) to be visible as the
> computed magnitude of this eclipse was only 0.96. There is also a poor agreement between the recorded and computed
> time of the eclipse. Thus this date may also be discarded.<br>The computed circumstance of the eclipse on 30 June 10
> BC is in excellent agreement with the observed details of the eclipse. Mercury, Venus and Sirius were all visible
> during the eclipse. There is also good agreement between the recorded and computed times. By computation, the eclipse
> began at a local time of 12.80 hours. This corresponds to about 95° before sunset, very close to the 90° quoted in the
> last line of the tablet. The eclipse is computed to have lasted for about 40° , slightly shorter than the 48° given
> for the total duration in the tenth line. However, errors of this size in the timing of eclipses are in no way
> unusual. It is therefore possible to confidently assign this date to the observation on this tablet.

Furthermore, it should be noted that the pages referenced by the Watchtower concern the timings of lunar eclipses, it
would have been far more appropriate to cite pages 47-51 where Steele documents the accuracy of the lunar six timings
themselves. The mean error is around 1-2° (1° = 4 minutes) [@steele2000observations, 51].

The accuracy of the lunar six measurements is demonstrated by BM 33066, the timings alone are
[sufficient to date the 7th year of Cambyses II to 523 BC](https://github.com/jacob-pro/astro-tablets/blob/master/results/bm33066_lunar_six_scores.txt)
(-522), a date and tablet which the Watchtower accepts and cites as a source. Surely this would not be possible if the
Babylonian clocks were wildly and inconsistently inaccurate?

Therefore, the Watchtower's complete exclusion of the lunar six timings is bogus.

## References
